Vermicomposting - the decomposition of organic matter by worms
==============================================================

Composting occurs naturally and occurs by methods of bacteria, plants, and animals.  It also occurs with or without oxygen.  Generally, when decomposition occurs without oxygen, dangerous toxins can be a biproduct.  It is recommended to compost in an oxygen rich enironment, or more generally, the air we breathe.

Vermicomposting, or composting with worms, is a method of composting that is focused on actively using worms to break down the organic waste.  As a rule of thumb, worms will eat about half their weight in food waste per day, so half a pound of worms will eat about a pound of food waste, every day.  With that said, if you do not produce that much waste, you can either enlist friends to provide you with their food waste, or just feed the worms what you have.  The worms will only multiply, or will manage their numbers naturally, based on the amount of food that is made available to them.

When buying worms, you should be buying the worms as a weight based on the worms themselves.  Any bedding material used to transfer the worms should not be paid for.  The only consideration here is, if being shipped by some third party, they will base their fee on total weight.  Best practices appear to be 1 to 1 ratio of worms to bedding, so 1 pound of worms will be shipped with one pound of bedding plus container, so expect a shipping weight of anywhere from 2 - 2.5 pounds.  As a reference, you can imagine a pound of butter.  A pound of butter is 454 grams.  Some weight may be lost in shipping, depending on time from packaging to arrival, due to evaporation.  This is normal but should not be extreme.  An arrival weight should not vary by more than -5%.

It is recommended to feed worms only plant based waste.  Some amount of animal waste can be used, although worms will take longer to consume wastes such as animal fats or proteins, this can include egg and milk products and those materials can cause excessive smell and can also attract unwanted pests.  Lightly bury these types of feed material and try to incorporate only small amounts.  Egg shells can be beneficial to the food stock and crushing the shells will help better incorporate the material.  Bones are unlikely to degrade in any beneficial way, so try to avoid adding bones.  Nut shells can also be used, but again, try to ensure the shells are ground down.  A nut grinder, burr grinder or stone grinder can help with this or if preferred, a mortor and pestel.  It is not recommended to include coffee grounds in food stock.  Some grounds are OK, but should not be excessive.  Coffee grounds can be highly acidic and retard the vigour of the worms.  Tea leaves are perfectly OK as food stock.  Paper filters are also OK, including from coffee.  Avoid any incorporation of plastic based material into the food stock or worm bin.
